This project displays real-time data transmitted from a BMP280 sensor and a MPU6050. The BMP measures barometric pressure, 
altitude and temperature while the MPU measures acceleration and rotational speed. Together these sensors are connected to 
a Raspberry Pi Zero W-2 which transmits data to a dashboard that displays the data.

Functionalities of the dashboard include:
    •	The display of altitude, temperature, pressure, velocity, acceleration, and acceleration across all three axis
    •	Ability to save data from a specified “test”
    •	Ability to rewatch past saved tests
    •	Ability to pause or scrub through the saved tests
    •	Remote power source and data transmission to allow for data transmission from anywhere

The purpose of this project is to display and further the knowledge I have obtained throughout my studies of software engineering 
at Western Governors University in a relevant way. Being that I am a student and actively trying to learn the discipline of 
software engineering I believe there is no better way to learn than to apply what one has learned in a relevant and interesting way. 
Much of the knowledge on how to complete this project is not known to me at the time of writing this and will have to be researched, 
I anticipate I will learn a great deal by the time this project is over. 

This project takes physical hardware and displays real-time data on a software application, it translates to numerous real world use cases;
cars, trains, planes, rockets, nearly anything that moves displays data regarding the movement of that object. This project 
will allow me to demonstrate knowledge in:
    •	Java
    •	Spring Framework
    •	CSS and HTML
    •	GIT
    •	Hardware devices

The rest of this document will contain information explaining my code and how I've worked throughout this project. 
I will also include a video of testing with various modes of propulsion's. 
Enjoy.

## How to use this app ##

Anyone can use this app regardless of what hardware they have. There is a test data mode, where fake data is generated by 
the TelemetrySimulator service. Simply enter a name for your test, click start recording and then click the TEST button. 
Simulated data should then show up on the cards, once finished click the standby button to stop the flow of dummy data and 
then click stop recording. Your session will be automatically saved. To view your session click the view past recordings button and your most 
recent recording will show up first. To view the details of your recording click view and use the scrubber bar to view each data point. 
If you wish to delete your recording click the delete button on the past recordings page. 

To integrate hardware you must have the hardware devices, but assuming you do, and they are wired up correctly with a script 
to send the data to Spring, use the terminal codes below to start sending data. The spring app must be running, but once 
everything is running the data will automatically come through to the main dashboard, just click the live button
and start recording. If you click the test button while live data is being sent the live data will stop and the test data will start.

## PI terminal commands
ssh pi@telemetry-pi.local     ----ssh into pi
sudo shutdown -h now          ----safely shutdown pi before removing power
source ~/telemetry-env/bin/activate ----- command to enter virtual environment to run sensor script
python3 ~/telemetry.py        -----commands to run script to send data
nano ~/telemetry.py           ----- command to edit script

## System Architecture ##
External Hardware - Raspberry PI Zero W-2 - MPU6050 sensor - BMP280 sensor

The MPU sensors measures linear acceleration, angular rotation, and temperature. The BMP measures altitude and pressure. 
The Pi reads these sensors via the i2c protocol and utilizing a python script sends the data to the Spring backend via HTTP. 
The Pi knows where to send the data through the URL endpoint written in the python script on the Pi.


Software Backend

Data comes into the TelemetryController class which utilizes the TelemetryWebsocket class' broadcast method to call the 
TelemetryData Model to parse the incoming data into json and send that data object to the front end. At the same time the 
websocket classes call the TelemetryRecordingService service which extends the repository interfaces to communicate with mysql workbench 
to save the data. The mysql database is initialized in application properties. The data is saved by session, which breaks down 
the data to dataPoints, which is recorded every 200ms.


Software Frontend

index.html is the main screen which a user will be directed to. They can then visit a page which shows all saved sessions 
and can then click on a session to visit each recording individually and scrub through each data point, while also seeing 
a broad overview of the data. An external along with some inline CSS is used and internal JavaScript code is used.

## Future Improvements ##

This is the prototype version one of this application. It currently works but has limitation, mainly on the hardware side. 
For this to be truly useful a user must be able to have the Pi and sensors packaged and protected so that they may be attached 
to something that you would want to read data of this type off of, such as a model rocket, drone, car, motorbike, anything that moves really. The 
Pi would also have to run off a mobile power source and have a way to transmit the data when out of the reach of this developers wifi. 
An alternative would be for the Pi to save the data locally and transmit it after the simulation when connected to wifi again.

Another improvement would be for this app to scale to a tablet or smartphone, so that users may interact with this data 
while in the field performing tests in real time. This would go along nicely with the hardware improvements mentioned above.

Additional software improvements include a recording timer to see how long the current recording session has been running, 
sorting and filtering on the history.html page, a count of how many datapoints are being recorded in real time, user authentication, 
ability to export recordings to excel or python, a status system where the pi can report its health such as its temperature and connections status, 
data charts, a way to compare recordings side-by-side, and the list could go on.


## Lessons Learned ##

This project helped to reinforce concepts I've learned throughout my schooling like html and CSS, while giving me an
opportunity to work with things like websockets, which I briefly learned about but haven't had the opportunity to use them
on a real world project. I also gained experience in Spring, which, I would still say I have only begun to scratch the 
surface on, but do feel more comfortable using spring to build real applications that utilize a database, objects, service classes
and integrate that into a working frontend. 

Also, as stated elsewhere in this README I did not have any experience in the integration of hardware devices with software
prior to this. The integration of hardware was both exciting and engaging, and is powerful to observe what the two can do
together.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# **Step 1** – Configure Raspberry Pi

This was fairly straight forward, the internet was my friend for this one as hardware devices are new to me. The Pi was 
configured to connect with my Macbook through my wifi via SSH, the sensors were enabled, the Azul repository and JAVA were 
installed on its operating system. I2C tools were installed that uses SDA and SCL pins (communication with sensors)

# **Step 2** - Wire in Sensors

I soldered the GPIO headers to the Pi and sensors then used jumper wires to connect them to a breadboard. The wires were color 
coordinated (red for hot, black for ground, yellow for SDA, green for SCL). The SDA and SCL pins allow for the sensors to be daisy-chained 
on the same bus, so that they can both send data back to the Pi through the same wires. 

# **Step 3** - Set up Coding Environment 

Before working with real data sent from my hardware devices I wanted to build a small application that takes simulated data 
and displays that on my local server. To do this I started by generating a spring project that will use spring web and websockets 
that will help to display the data and update in real time. Class TelemetryData was created to house the variables that I wanted 
to display that will be sent over from the Pi. The @Data annotation was used from project Lombok to generate the getters, setters, etc. 
for all the variables without me having to write that code. 

The variables that were chosen were meant to mimic flight data.

From there class TelemetrySimulator was made, this is the class that is generating the random data, that will be disabled when receiving data. 
The data was set using the random number generator, java's Math class and a few numerical equations to generate realist(ish) data. 

Class WebSocketConfig enables the use of websockets within the spring application. Class TelemetryWebSocketHandler manages the 
connection and to facilitate sending the data to the front end server. The object mapper takes in the data object and converts it to JSON, 
the JSON is then converted to a text message with the TextMessage clas and sent to the browser (if the session is open).
Much of the work with websockets was researched. 

Class TelemetryController is what actually causes the data to be sent to the browser. It injects the data simulator class, 
creates a new data object and calls on the generateData() method to populate random data. This data is then broadcast to 
the browser through the telemetry websocket handler which is also injected into this class via the constructor. The method runs every 200ms.

The front end was then added via index.html and css. This was straight forward for the most part, aside from integrating the 
websocket into the javascript, which was a new concept for me. A new websocket variable is made that uses the url path established 
in the webSocketConfig class. Then the script uses the innerHTML function to manipulate the html with data that is converted into 
JSON that is converted to a text message in the webSocketHandler class. The ws.onMessage function is called that parses the JSON from the event data. 
Ternary operators are used to display the data coming in. The javascript, html and css were written in vs-code which is a more 
familiar front end editor for me.

After some testing and troubleshooting the dashboard works and displays simulated data. Further functionality will be added 
in to the software in the future.

# **Step 4** - Display real time data from the Pi

Had issues with the Pi, first the sensors would not show up via the i2c protocol. In depth troubleshooting was done to include 
changing jumper wires, changing breadboards, double-checking connections, 
changing wiring methods, resoldering headers etc. SSH for the Pi stopped working, will circle back around to this.

# **Step 5** - Build out software more - incorporate data recording/playback

Created a database in mySql workbench, added dependencies and configured applications setting to allow spring to connect to the database.
TelemetrySession maps a test to the database. Created TelemetryDataPoint to store each individual reading of data.
Created the TelemetrySessionRepository and extended the JpaRepository to help cut down on boilerplate code. Did the same thing 
for individual data points. Class TelemetryRecordingService was created which interacts with TelemetryData, TelemetryDataPoint, 
TelemetrySession, and the repositories to allow for methods like: recordData, startRecording, endRecording, and to search for a 
session by its ID or to bring up all sessions. 

After the creation of the recording service the websocket handler classes had to be updated. The recording service was injected 
into the websocket handler class and the broadcast method was updated so that the data was saved if there was an active recording. 
Websocket config was updated to pass the recording service to the handler. Then the controller class was updated to provide the 
frontend with the recording logic that was just added.

Updated index.html and css file which involved changing around some of the javascript.
Confirmed data is being shared in mySql

Working on creating a way to toggle back and forth from test data to real world data. Also working on creating a new page that 
a user can go to access past recordings. Controller class updated to allow for toggle.


# **Step 6** - Continue building backend - interact with past record data
A can of worms has been opened on building out the software, so I decided to break it down into further steps.

Initially, the recordings were not showing in the history.html page. After troubleshooting, it was realized that TelemetrySession 
and DataPoints created an infinite loop crashing the program. Json annotations were added to TelemetrySession and TelemetryDataPoint 
attribute within their respective classes to fix this. 

With the past recordings showing up they don't mean much by themselves if the user cannot access the data. A feature will be added 
for the user to click on each recording to view a data summary and scrub through the data. A delete feature will also be added. 
Also as of right now the GET api/recording/sessions returns a TelemetrySessions with all data points. In the future if too many data 
points are provided the endpoint should be paginated which would be a future improvement of this app.

Delete feature was added to the past recordings list for each recording. Button with JS in the front end that calls the method 
in the controller class who communicates to the TelemetryRecordingService which uses the TelemetrySessionRepository that ultimately 
extends the CRUD repository.


# **Step 7** - Add recording details page
With most data recording applications a very large emphasis is placed on being able to go back and review past data. 
That will be the purpose of this page. Users will be able to get a summary of all the data points as well as scrub through each
data point to view a specific data set at a specific moment in time.

Added the recording-detail.html page, that the JS block maps for each recording sessions ID#. Added two new JS functions 
to fetch the data based on the session id# and started building out and styling that html page. The scrub max was set in JS based 
on the datapoints length because it changes for each session, so we should not hardcode it. Also global variables were declared, 
an empty data points array that fills when the fetch is complete and a currentIndex field to track which point the scrubber is sitting on. 
An event listener was added to track the actual number the scrubber is on.

Populated div cards the same way as in index.html using the render cards function

Then populated a data summary looking at relevant maximum, minimum and average values with smaller cards above the playback cards, 
this way the user can quickly see relevant data. New variables were created using equations with arrow functions
and the cards were populated similarly to the playback cards, just smaller and with a slightly different font color to make them stand out.

A scrub bar was added which is really just a range input with an event listener that takes the current index of the scrub bar 
and calls the render cards function with that specific index. A play and pause button were also added which calls the play and 
pause function onclick which manipulates the current index using an interval function which calls the renderCards function within it.

Some styling was done to clean things up.

# **Step 8** - More hardware
The software was mostly finished so at this point we needed to revisit the hardware components. The pi was re-flashed and wiring 
was done differently, at this point the i2c protocol was working and the sensors were being read on the pi.
Getting this application to read and transmit the data is something completely new to me and I relied on external resources heavily. 
There were many small bugs to work out. First a python script was written to the pi within the terminal. 
The script broadcast data to the ip that my mac is on with an endpoint for the live data to map to defined in the controller. 
Data is read from the MPU and BMP sensors, some additional calculations had to be made, then the data was added to a python 
dictionary and posted to the URL.

Within spring, as mentioned a new POSTMapping method was declared, at this point the bugs started showing themselves. There were 
some errors with the primitive data type double as some fields were left null, they were changed to the wrapper datatype Double. 
This apart from that there were human typo and syntax errors that had to be worked through. After all this though the live data did come through, 
however additional areas for improvement were found on the software frontend that needed to be made that will be discussed in the next section.

# **Step 8** - More Software (cleanup)
Added a toggle mode for test and live data as the buttons from before would most likely be confusing to a user. Now a user can 
toggle between a standby, live, and test mode. A set mode function was added to index.html which calls on the controller endpoints
to start or stop test data. The problem that arose is when the pi is on and sending data it is automatically communicating with 
Spring and sending data out, the controller had to be updated so that if test data was selected the live data would not try to write to 
the application along with the test data. This was done by adding a simple if statement to check if the simulator boolean is enabled 
not to broadcast the data coming in.









